<section xml:id="item_fhEPnveFhb9tmd7Pe"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Use the Try Harder, Luke</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/fhEPnveFhb9tmd7Pe/use-the-try-harder-luke"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2020-08-09</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>More Dakka</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Five minute timers</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Fiction</primary></indexterm>
  <blockquote>
  <para> &quot;When there&apos;s a will to fail, obstacles can be found.&quot;   —John McCarthy</para>
</blockquote>
<para>I first watched <emphasis>Star Wars</emphasis> IV-VI when I was very young.  Seven, maybe, or nine?  So my memory was dim, but I recalled Luke Skywalker as being, you know, this cool Jedi guy.</para>
<para>Imagine my horror and disappointment, when I watched the saga again, years later, and discovered that Luke was a <link xl:href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X66jntR0MVE">whiny teenager</link>.</para>
<para>I mention this because yesterday, I looked up, on Youtube, the source of the Yoda quote:  &quot;Do, or do not.  There is no try.&quot;</para>
<para>Oh.  My.  Cthulhu.</para>
<para>Along with the Youtube clip in question, I present to you a little-known outtake from the scene, in which the director and writer, George Lucas, argues with Mark Hamill, who played Luke Skywalker:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> Luke:  All right, I&apos;ll give it a try.</para>
  <para>Yoda:  No!  Try not.  Do.  Or do not.  There is no try.</para>
  <para><emphasis> Luke raises his hand, and slowly, the X-wing begins to rise out of the water—Yoda&apos;s eyes widen—but then the ship sinks again.</emphasis></para>
</blockquote>
<para>Mark Hamill:  &quot;Um, George...&quot;</para>
<para>George Lucas:  &quot;What is it now?&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;So... according to the script, next I say, &apos;I can&apos;t.  It&apos;s too big&apos;.&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;That&apos;s right.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;Shouldn&apos;t Luke maybe give it another shot?&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;No.  Luke gives up, and sits down next to Yoda—&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;This is the hero who&apos;s going to take down the Empire?  Look, it was one thing when he was a whiny teenager at the beginning, but he&apos;s in Jedi training now.  Last movie he blew up the Death Star.  Luke should be showing a little backbone.&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;No.  You give up.  And then Yoda lectures you for a while, and you say, &apos;You want the impossible&apos;.  Can you remember that?&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;<emphasis>Impossible?</emphasis>  What did he do, run a formal calculation to arrive at a mathematical proof?   The X-wing was already starting to rise out of the swamp!  That&apos;s the feasibility demonstration right there!  Luke loses it for a second and the ship sinks back—and now he says it&apos;s <emphasis>impossible?</emphasis>  Not to mention that Yoda, who&apos;s got literally eight hundred years of seniority in the field, just told him it should be doable—&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;And then you walk away.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;It&apos;s his friggin&apos;<emphasis>spaceship!</emphasis>  If he leaves it in the swamp, he&apos;s stuck on Dagobah for the rest of his miserable life!  He&apos;s not just going to walk away!  Look, let&apos;s just cut to the next scene with the words &apos;one month later&apos; and Luke is still raggedly standing in front of the swamp, trying to raise his ship for the thousandth time—&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;No.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;Fine!  We&apos;ll show a sunset and a sunrise, as he stands there with his arm out, straining, and <emphasis>then</emphasis> Luke says &apos;It&apos;s impossible&apos;.  Though really, he ought to try again when he&apos;s fully rested—&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;No.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;<emphasis>Five goddamned minutes!  </emphasis>Five goddamned minutes before he gives up!&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;I am not halting the story for five minutes while the X-wing bobs in the swamp like a bathtub toy.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;For the love of sweet candied yams!  If a pathetic loser like this could master the Force, everyone in the galaxy would be using it!  People would become Jedi because it was easier than going to high school.&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;Look, you&apos;re the actor.  Let me be the storyteller.  Just say your lines and try to mean them.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;The audience isn&apos;t going to buy it.&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;Trust me, they will.&quot;</para>
<para>Mark:  &quot;They&apos;re going to get up and walk out of the theater.&quot;</para>
<para>George:  &quot;They&apos;re going to sit there and nod along and not notice anything out of the ordinary.  Look, you don&apos;t understand human nature.  People wouldn&apos;t try for five minutes before giving up if the fate of humanity were at stake.&quot;</para>

  
</section>
