<section xml:id="item_NyFtHycJvkyNjXNsP"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Chaotic Inversion</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/NyFtHycJvkyNjXNsP/chaotic-inversion"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2008-11-29</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Mind Projection Fallacy</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Willpower</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Akrasia</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Productivity</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Futility of Chaos</primary></indexterm>
  <para>I was recently having a conversation with some friends on the topic of hour-by-hour productivity and willpower maintenance—something I&apos;ve struggled with my whole life.</para>
<para>I can <olink targetdoc="item_e6WsPsivzBifrWHeA" targetptr="item_fpecAJLG9czABgCe9">avoid running away from a hard problem the first time I see it</olink> (perseverance on a timescale of seconds), and I can stick to the same problem for years; but to keep working on a timescale of <emphasis>hours</emphasis> is a constant battle for me.  It goes without saying that I&apos;ve already read reams and reams of advice; and the most help I got from it was realizing that a sizable fraction other creative professionals had the same problem, and couldn&apos;t beat it either, no matter how reasonable<emphasis> </emphasis>all the advice sounds.</para>
<para>&quot;What do you do when you can&apos;t work?&quot; my friends asked me.  (Conversation probably not accurate, this is a very loose gist.)</para>
<para>And I replied that I usually browse random websites, or watch a short video.</para>
<para>&quot;Well,&quot; they said, &quot;if you know you can&apos;t work for a while, you should watch a movie or something.&quot;</para>
<para>&quot;Unfortunately,&quot; I replied, &quot;I have to do something whose time comes in short units, like browsing the Web or watching short videos, because I might become able to work again at any time, and I can&apos;t predict when—&quot;</para>
<para>And then I stopped, because I&apos;d just had a revelation.</para>
<para>I&apos;d always thought of my workcycle as something <emphasis>chaotic,</emphasis> something <emphasis>unpredictable.</emphasis>  I never used those words, but that was the way I <emphasis>treated</emphasis> it.</para>
<para>But here my friends seemed to be implying—what a strange thought—that <emphasis>other</emphasis> people could predict when they would become able to work again, and structure their time accordingly.</para>
<para>And it occurred to me for the first time that I might have been committing that damned old chestnut the <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_ZTRiSNmeGQK8AkdN2">Mind Projection Fallacy</olink>, right out there in my ordinary everyday life instead of high abstraction.</para>
<para>Maybe it wasn&apos;t that my productivity was<emphasis> unusually </emphasis><emphasis>chaotic;</emphasis> maybe I was just<emphasis> unusually </emphasis><emphasis>stupid</emphasis> with respect to predicting it.</para>
<para>That&apos;s what inverted stupidity looks like—chaos.  Something hard to handle, hard to grasp, hard to guess, something you can&apos;t do anything with.  It&apos;s not just an idiom for high abstract things like Artificial Intelligence.  It can apply in ordinary life too.</para>
<para>And the reason we don&apos;t think of the alternative explanation &quot;I&apos;m stupid&quot;, is <emphasis>not</emphasis>—I suspect—that we think so highly of ourselves.  It&apos;s just that we don&apos;t think of ourselves at all.  We just see <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_ZTRiSNmeGQK8AkdN2">a chaotic feature of the environment</olink>.</para>
<para>So now it&apos;s occurred to me that my productivity problem may not be chaos, but my own stupidity.</para>
<para>And that may or may not help anything.  It certainly doesn&apos;t fix the problem right away.  Saying &quot;I&apos;m ignorant&quot; doesn&apos;t make you knowledgeable.</para>
<para>But it is, at least, a different path than saying &quot;it&apos;s too chaotic&quot;.</para>

  
</section>
