<section xml:id="item_zJZvoiwydJ5zvzTHK"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>The Allais Paradox</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/zJZvoiwydJ5zvzTHK/the-allais-paradox"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2021-08-12</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Heuristics &amp; Biases</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Utility Functions</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Paradoxes</primary></indexterm>
  <para>Choose between the following two options:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> <emphasis role="bold">1A</emphasis>.  $24,000, with certainty.</para>
  <para><emphasis role="bold">1B</emphasis>.  33/34 chance of winning $27,000, and 1/34 chance of winning nothing.</para>
</blockquote>
<para>Which seems more intuitively appealing?  And which one would you choose in real life?</para>
<para>Now which of these two options would you intuitively prefer, and which would you choose in real life?</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> <emphasis role="bold">2A</emphasis>. 34% chance of winning $24,000, and 66% chance of winning nothing.</para>
  <para><emphasis role="bold">2B</emphasis>. 33% chance of winning $27,000, and 67% chance of winning nothing.</para>
</blockquote>
<para>The Allais Paradox - as Allais called it, though it&apos;s not really a paradox - was one of the first conflicts between decision theory and human reasoning to be experimentally exposed, in 1953.  I&apos;ve <link xl:href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allais_paradox">modified it slightly</link> for ease of math, but the essential problem is the same:  Most people prefer 1A &gt; 1B, and most people prefer 2B &gt; 2A.  Indeed, in within-subject comparisons, a majority of subjects express both preferences simultaneously.</para>
<para>This is a problem because the 2s are equal to a one-third chance of playing the 1s.  That is, 2A is equivalent to playing gamble 1A with 34% probability, and 2B is equivalent to playing 1B with 34% probability.</para>
<para>Among the axioms used to prove that &quot;consistent&quot; decisionmakers can be viewed as maximizing expected utility, is the <link xl:href="http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/essays/uncert/vnmaxioms.htm">Axiom of Independence</link>:  If X is strictly preferred to Y, then a probability P of X and (1 - P) of Z should be strictly preferred to P chance of Y and (1 - P) chance of Z.</para>
<para>All the axioms are consequences, as well as antecedents, of a consistent utility function.  So it must be possible to prove that the experimental subjects above <emphasis>can&apos;t</emphasis> have a consistent utility function over outcomes.  And indeed, you can&apos;t simultaneously have:</para>
<itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para> U($24,000)   &gt;   33/34 U($27,000) + 1/34 U($0)</para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para> 0.34 U($24,000) + 0.66 U($0)   &lt;   0.33 U($27,000) + 0.67 U($0)</para>
  </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>These two equations are algebraically inconsistent, regardless of U, so the Allais Paradox has nothing to do with the diminishing marginal utility of money.</para>
<para>Maurice Allais initially defended the revealed preferences of the experimental subjects - he saw the experiment as exposing a flaw in the conventional ideas of utility, rather than exposing a flaw in human psychology.  This was 1953, after all, and the heuristics-and-biases movement wouldn&apos;t really get started for another two decades.  Allais thought his experiment just showed that the Axiom of Independence clearly wasn&apos;t a good idea in real life.</para>
<para>(<link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/01/beautiful-proba.html">How naive, how foolish, how simplistic</link> is Bayesian decision theory...)</para>
<para>Surely, the <emphasis>certainty</emphasis> of having $24,000 should count for <emphasis>something.</emphasis>  You can <emphasis>feel</emphasis> the difference, right?  The solid reassurance?</para>
<para>(I&apos;m starting to think of this as &quot;naive philosophical realism&quot; - supposing that our <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/10/a-priori.html">intuitions directly expose truths</link> about which strategies are wiser, as though it was a directly perceived fact that &quot;1A is superior to 1B&quot;.  Intuitions <emphasis>directly</emphasis> expose truths about human cognitive functions, and only <emphasis>indirectly</emphasis> expose (after we <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/09/the-lens-that-s.html">reflect on the cognitive functions</link> themselves) truths about rationality.)</para>
<para>&quot;But come now,&quot; you say, &quot;is it really such a terrible thing, to depart from <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/01/beautiful-proba.html">Bayesian beauty</link>?&quot;  Okay, so the subjects didn&apos;t follow the neat little &quot;independence axiom&quot; espoused by the likes of von Neumann and Morgenstern.  Yet who says that things <emphasis>must</emphasis> be neat and tidy?</para>
<para>Why fret about elegance, if it makes us take risks we don&apos;t want?  <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/11/terminal-values.html">Expected utility</link> tells us that we ought to assign some kind of number to an outcome, and then multiply that value by the outcome&apos;s probability, add them up, etc.  Okay, but why do we <emphasis>have</emphasis> to do that?  Why not make up more palatable rules instead?</para>
<para>There is always a price for leaving the Bayesian Way.  That&apos;s what coherence and uniqueness theorems are all about.</para>
<para>In this case, if an agent prefers 1A &gt; 1B, and 2B &gt; 2A, it introduces a form of <emphasis>preference reversal -</emphasis> a <emphasis>dynamic inconsistency</emphasis> in the agent&apos;s planning.  You become a <emphasis>money pump.</emphasis></para>
<para>Suppose that at 12:00PM I roll a hundred-sided die.  If the die shows a number greater than 34, the game terminates.  Otherwise, at 12:05PM I consult a switch with two settings, A and B.  If the setting is A, I pay you $24,000.  If the setting is B, I roll a 34-sided die and pay you $27,000 unless the die shows &quot;34&quot;, in which case I pay you nothing.</para>
<para>Let&apos;s say you prefer 1A over 1B, and 2B over 2A, and you would pay a single penny to indulge each preference.  The switch starts in state A.  Before 12:00PM, you pay me a penny to throw the switch to B.  The die comes up 12.  After 12:00PM and before 12:05PM, you pay me a penny to throw the switch to A.</para>
<para>I have taken your two cents on the subject.</para>
<para>If you indulge your intuitions, and dismiss mere elegance as a pointless obsession with neatness, then don&apos;t be surprised when your pennies get taken from you...</para>
<para>(I think the same failure to <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/01/still-a-chance.html">proportionally devalue the emotional impact of small probabilities</link> is responsible for the <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/04/new_improved_lo.html">lottery</link>.)</para>
<bibliography>
  <bibliomixed><abbrev>bg_8aef5ff798caaa62a111094353bc907b</abbrev> Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l&apos;homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des postulats et axiomes de l&apos;école américaine.  <emphasis>Econometrica,</emphasis><emphasis role="bold">21</emphasis>, 503-46.</bibliomixed>
  <bibliomixed><abbrev>bg_4491b9109d4611e455e2f09918ccd10a</abbrev> Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (1979.) Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. <emphasis>Econometrica,</emphasis><emphasis role="bold">47</emphasis>, 263-92. </bibliomixed>
</bibliography>

  
</section>
