<section xml:id="item_mnS2WYLCGJP2kQkRn"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Отсутствие свидетельств — свидетельство отсутствия</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/mnS2WYLCGJP2kQkRn/absence-of-evidence-is-evidence-of-absence"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2021-04-01</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Conservation of Expected Evidence</primary></indexterm>
  <para>From Robyn Dawes’s <emphasis role="italic">Rational Choice in an Uncertain World</emphasis>:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> Запоздалое впихивание свидетельств в гипотезу сыграло свою роль в самой горестной главе истории Соединенных Штатов, интернировании японцев в начале Второй Мировой. 21 февраля 1942 года Эрл Варрен, губернатор Калифорнии, в ответ на замечание об отсутствии случаев саботажа, шпионажа или иной подрывной деятельности живущих в Америке японцев, сказал: «Я придерживаюсь мнения, что это отсутствие является самым зловещим во всей этой ситуации. Больше чем что-либо ещё, это убеждает меня в том, что будущие саботажи, будущие действия Пятой Колонны будут назначены на определённое время, точно так же, как на определённое время был назначен Перл Харбор… Я считаю, что нам внушают лживое ощущение безопасности» — Робин Дэйвс, «Rational Choice in an Uncertain World».</para>
</blockquote>
<para>Рассмотрим утверждение Варрена через призму теоремы Байеса. Рассмотрим утверждение Варрена через призму теоремы Байеса. Когда мы видим свидетельство, распределение вероятностей между гипотезами меняется: вероятность гипотез, которые считали появление такого свидетельства более правдоподобным, увеличивается за счёт вероятности гипотез, которые считали появление такого свидетельства менее правдоподобным. На исход влияют лишь относительные отношения правдоподобия и вероятности: можно приписать свидетельству очень большое правдоподобие, но всё равно потерять вероятностную меру из-за того, что какая-то другая гипотеза приписала этому свидетельству ещё большее правдоподобие.</para>
<para>Варрен, похоже, утверждает, что отсутствие саботажа <emphasis role="italic">закрепляет</emphasis> его убеждение о существовании Пятой Колонны. Да, <emphasis role="italic">возможно</emphasis>, Пятая Колонна совершит саботаж потом. Но вероятность того, что отсутствие саботажа совершила существующая Пятая Колонна ниже вероятности того, что отсутствие саботажа совершила несуществующая Пятая Колонна.</para>
<para>Let E stand for the observation of sabotage, and ¬E for the observation of no sabotage. The symbol H1 stands for the hypothesis of a Japanese-American Fifth Column, and H2 for the hypothesis that no Fifth Column exists. The <emphasis role="italic">conditional probability</emphasis> P(E | H), or “E given H,” is how confidently we’d expect to see the evidence E if we assumed the hypothesis H were true.</para>
<para>Whatever the likelihood that a Fifth Column would do no sabotage, the probability P(¬E | H1), it won’t be as large as the likelihood that there’s no sabotage <emphasis role="italic">given that there’s no Fifth Column</emphasis>, the probability P(¬E | H2). So observing a lack of sabotage increases the probability that no Fifth Column exists.</para>
<para>A lack of sabotage doesn’t <emphasis role="italic">prove</emphasis> that no Fifth Column exists. Absence of <emphasis role="italic">proof</emphasis> is not <emphasis role="italic">proof</emphasis> of absence. In logic, (A ⇒ B), read “A implies B,” is not equivalent to (¬A ⇒ ¬B), read “not-A implies not-B .”</para>
<para>But in probability theory, absence of <emphasis role="italic">evidence</emphasis> is always <emphasis role="italic">evidence</emphasis> of absence. If E is a binary event and P(H | E) &gt; P(H), i.e., seeing E increases the probability of H, then P(H | ¬ E) &lt; P(H), i.e., failure to observe E decreases the probability of H . The probability P(H) is a weighted mix of P(H | E) and P(H | ¬ E), and necessarily lies between the two.<footnote xml:id="fn_332040e060146b3261347369ef038072">
    <para> If any of this sounds at all confusing, see my discussion of Bayesian updating toward the end of <emphasis role="italic">The Machine in the Ghost</emphasis>, the third volume of <link xl:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/rationality"><emphasis role="italic">Rationality: From AI to Zombies</emphasis></link>.</para>
  </footnote>
</para>
<para>Under the vast majority of real-life circumstances, a cause may not reliably produce signs of itself, but the absence of the cause is even less likely to produce the signs. The absence of an observation may be strong evidence of absence or very weak evidence of absence, depending on how likely the cause is to produce the observation. The absence of an observation that is only weakly permitted (even if the alternative hypothesis does not allow it at all) is very weak evidence of absence (though it is evidence nonetheless). This is the fallacy of “gaps in the fossil record”—fossils form only rarely; it is futile to trumpet the absence of a weakly permitted observation when many strong positive observations have already been recorded. But if there are <emphasis role="italic">no</emphasis> positive observations at all, it is time to worry; hence the Fermi Paradox.</para>
<para>Your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused by fiction than by reality; if you are equally good at explaining any outcome you have zero knowledge. The strength of a model is not what it <emphasis role="italic">can</emphasis> explain, but what it <emphasis role="italic">can’t</emphasis>, for only prohibitions constrain anticipation. If you don’t notice when your model makes the evidence unlikely, you might as well have no model, and also you might as well have no evidence; no brain and no eyes.</para>

  
</section>
