<section xml:id="item_W7LcN9gmdnaAk9K52"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Don't Believe You'll Self-Deceive</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/W7LcN9gmdnaAk9K52/don-t-believe-you-ll-self-deceive"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2009-03-09</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Rationality</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Self-Deception</primary></indexterm>
  <para>I don&apos;t mean to seem like I&apos;m picking on Kurige, but I think you have to expect a certain amount of questioning if you show up on Less Wrong and <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_rZX4WuufAPbN6wQTv">say</olink>:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> One thing I&apos;ve come to realize that helps to explain the disparity I feel when I talk with most other Christians is the fact that somewhere along the way my world-view took a major shift away from blind faith and landed somewhere in the vicinity of Orwellian double-think.</para>
</blockquote>
<para>&quot;If you <emphasis>know</emphasis> it&apos;s <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/09/doublethink-cho.html">double-think</link>...</para>
<para>...how can you still <emphasis>believe </emphasis>it?&quot; I helplessly want to say.</para>
<para><olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_ERRk4thxxYNcScqR4">Or</olink>:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> I chose to believe in the existence of God—deliberately and consciously. This decision, however, has absolutely zero effect on the actual existence of God.</para>
</blockquote>
<para>If you <emphasis>know </emphasis>your belief isn&apos;t correlated to reality, how can you still believe it?</para>
<para>Shouldn&apos;t the <emphasis>gut-level</emphasis> realization, &quot;Oh, wait, the sky really <emphasis>isn&apos;t</emphasis> green&quot; follow from the realization &quot;My map that says &apos;the sky is green&apos; has no reason to be correlated with the territory&quot;?</para>
<para>Well... apparently not.</para>
<para>One part of this puzzle may be my explanation of <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_ERRk4thxxYNcScqR4">Moore&apos;s Paradox</olink> (&quot;It&apos;s raining, but I don&apos;t believe it is&quot;)—that people introspectively mistake positive affect attached to a quoted belief, for actual credulity.</para>
<para>But another part of it may just be that—contrary to the indignation I initially wanted to put forward—it&apos;s actually quite <emphasis>easy</emphasis> not to make the jump from &quot;The map that reflects the territory would say &apos;X&apos;&quot; to actually believing &quot;X&quot;.  It takes some work to <emphasis>explain</emphasis> the ideas of <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/09/what-is-evidenc.html">minds as map-territory correspondence builders</link>, and even then, it may take more work to get the implications on a <emphasis>gut level</emphasis>.</para>
<para>I realize now that when I <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_ERRk4thxxYNcScqR4">wrote</olink>&quot;You cannot make yourself believe the sky is green by an act of will&quot;, I wasn&apos;t just a dispassionate reporter of the existing facts.  I was also trying to instill a self-fulfilling prophecy.</para>
<para>It may be wise to go around deliberately repeating &quot;I can&apos;t get away with double-thinking!  Deep down, I&apos;ll know it&apos;s not true!  If I know my map has no reason to be correlated with the territory, that means I don&apos;t believe it!&quot;</para>
<para>Because that way—if you&apos;re ever tempted to try—the thoughts &quot;But I know this isn&apos;t really true!&quot; and &quot;I can&apos;t fool myself!&quot; will always rise readily to mind; and that way, you will indeed be less likely to fool yourself successfully.  You&apos;re more likely to get, on a gut level, that telling yourself X doesn&apos;t make X true: and therefore, really truly not-X.</para>
<para>If you keep telling yourself that you <emphasis>can&apos;t</emphasis> just deliberately choose to believe the sky is green—then you&apos;re less likely to succeed in fooling yourself on one level or another; either in the sense of really believing it, or of falling into <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_ERRk4thxxYNcScqR4">Moore&apos;s Paradox</olink>, <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/07/belief-in-belie.html">belief in belief</link>, or <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_wP2ymm44kZZwaFPYh">belief in self-deception</olink>.</para>
<para>If you keep telling yourself that deep down you&apos;ll know—</para>
<para>If you keep telling yourself that you&apos;d just look at your elaborately constructed false map, and just know that it was a false map without any expected correlation to the territory, and therefore, despite all its elaborate construction, you wouldn&apos;t be able to invest any credulity in it—</para>
<para>If you keep telling yourself that reflective consistency will take over and make you stop believing on the object level, once you come to the meta-level realization that the map is not reflecting—</para>
<para>Then when push comes to shove—you may, indeed, fail.</para>
<para>When it comes to deliberate self-deception, you must <emphasis>believe in your own inability!</emphasis></para>
<para>Tell yourself the effort is doomed—<emphasis>and it will be!</emphasis></para>
<para>Is that the power of positive thinking, or the power of negative thinking?  Either way, it seems like a wise precaution.</para>

  
</section>
