<section xml:id="item_WBdvyyHLdxZSAMmoz"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Taboo Your Words</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WBdvyyHLdxZSAMmoz/taboo-your-words"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2023-06-14</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Techniques</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>World Modeling</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Philosophy of Language</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Conversation (topic)</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Disagreement</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Rationalist Taboo</primary></indexterm>
  <para>In the game Taboo (by Hasbro), the objective is for a player to have their partner guess a word written on a card, without using that word or five additional words listed on the card.  For example, you might have to get your partner to say &quot;baseball&quot; without using the words &quot;sport&quot;, &quot;bat&quot;, &quot;hit&quot;, &quot;pitch&quot;, &quot;base&quot; or of course &quot;baseball&quot;.</para>
<para>As soon as I see a problem like that, I at once think, &quot;An artificial group conflict in which you use a long wooden cylinder to whack a thrown spheroid, and then run between four safe positions.&quot;  It might not be the most efficient strategy to convey the word &apos;baseball&apos; under the stated rules - that might be, &quot;It&apos;s what the Yankees play&quot; - but the general skill of <emphasis>blanking a word out of my mind</emphasis> was one I&apos;d practiced for years, albeit with a different purpose.</para>
<para>Yesterday we saw how replacing terms with definitions could reveal the <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_bcM5ft8jvsffsZZ4Y">empirical unproductivity</olink> of the classical Aristotelian syllogism.  All humans are mortal (and also, apparently, featherless bipeds); Socrates is human; therefore Socrates is mortal.  When we replace the word &apos;human&apos; by its apparent definition, the following underlying reasoning is revealed:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> All [mortal, ~feathers, biped] are mortal;</para>
  <para> Socrates is a [mortal, ~feathers, biped];</para>
  <para> Therefore Socrates is mortal.</para>
</blockquote>
<para>But the principle of replacing words by definitions applies much more broadly:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> Albert:  &quot;A tree falling in a deserted forest makes a sound.&quot;</para>
  <para> Barry:  &quot;A tree falling in a deserted forest does not make a sound.&quot;</para>
</blockquote>
<para>Clearly, since one says &quot;sound&quot; and one says &quot;not sound&quot;, we must have a contradiction, right?  But suppose that they both dereference their pointers before speaking:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> Albert:  &quot;A tree falling in a deserted forest matches [membership test: this event generates acoustic vibrations].&quot;</para>
  <para> Barry:  &quot;A tree falling in a deserted forest does not match [membership test: this event generates auditory experiences].&quot;</para>
</blockquote>
<para>Now there is no longer an apparent collision—all they had to do was prohibit themselves from using the word <emphasis>sound</emphasis>. If &quot;acoustic vibrations&quot; came into dispute, we would just play Taboo again and say &quot;pressure waves in a material medium&quot;; if necessary we would play Taboo again on the word &quot;<olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_NMoLJuDJEms7Ku9XS">wave</olink>&quot; and replace it with the wave equation.  (Play Taboo on &quot;auditory experience&quot; and you get &quot;That form of sensory processing, within the human brain, which takes as input a linear time series of frequency mixes...&quot;)</para>
<para>But suppose, on the other hand, that Albert and Barry were to have the argument:</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> Albert:  &quot;Socrates matches the concept [membership test: this person will die after drinking hemlock].&quot;</para>
  <para> Barry:  &quot;Socrates matches the concept [membership test: this person will not die after drinking hemlock].&quot;</para>
</blockquote>
<para>Now Albert and Barry have a substantive clash of expectations; a difference in what they anticipate seeing after Socrates drinks hemlock.  But they might not notice this, if they happened to use the same word &quot;human&quot; for their different concepts.</para>
<para>You get a very different picture of what people agree or disagree about, depending on whether you take a label&apos;s-eye-view (Albert says &quot;sound&quot; and Barry says &quot;not sound&quot;, so they must disagree) or taking the test&apos;s-eye-view (Albert&apos;s membership test is acoustic vibrations, Barry&apos;s is auditory experience).</para>
<para>Get together a pack of <emphasis>soi-disant</emphasis> futurists and ask them if they believe we&apos;ll have Artificial Intelligence in thirty years, and I would guess that at least half of them will say yes.  If you leave it at that, they&apos;ll shake hands and congratulate themselves on their consensus.  But make the term &quot;Artificial Intelligence&quot; taboo, and ask them to describe <emphasis>what</emphasis> they expect to see, without ever using words like &quot;computers&quot; or &quot;think&quot;, and you might find quite a conflict of expectations hiding under that featureless standard word.  Likewise <link xl:href="http://intelligence.org/blog/2007/09/30/three-major-singularity-schools/">that other term</link>.  And see also Shane Legg&apos;s compilation of <link xl:href="http://arxiv.org/abs/0706.3639">71 definitions of &quot;intelligence&quot;</link>.</para>
<para>The illusion of unity across religions can be dispelled by making the term &quot;God&quot; taboo, and asking them to say what it is they believe in; or making the word &quot;faith&quot; taboo, and asking them why they believe it. Though mostly they won&apos;t be able to answer at all, because it is mostly <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_CqyJzDZWvGhhFJ7dY">profession</olink> in the first place, and you cannot cognitively zoom in on an audio recording.</para>
<para>When you find yourself in philosophical difficulties, <emphasis>the first line of defense is not to define your problematic terms, but to see whether you can think without using those terms at all.</emphasis>  Or any of their short synonyms.  And be careful not to let yourself invent a new word to use instead.  Describe outward observables and interior mechanisms; don&apos;t use a single handle, whatever that handle may be.</para>
<para>Albert says that people have &quot;free will&quot;.  Barry says that people don&apos;t have &quot;free will&quot;.  Well, that will certainly generate an apparent conflict.  Most philosophers would advise Albert and Barry to try to define exactly what they mean by &quot;free will&quot;, on which topic they will certainly be able to discourse at great length.  I would advise Albert and Barry to describe what it is that they think people do, or do not have, without using the phrase &quot;free will&quot; at all.  (If you want to try this at home, you should also avoid the words &quot;choose&quot;, &quot;act&quot;, &quot;decide&quot;, &quot;determined&quot;, &quot;responsible&quot;, or any of their synonyms.)</para>
<para>This is one of the nonstandard tools in my toolbox, and in my humble opinion, it works <emphasis>way way</emphasis> better than the standard one.  It also requires more effort to use; you get what you pay for.</para>

  
</section>
