<section xml:id="item_cFzC996D7Jjds3vS9"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Arguing "By Definition"</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/cFzC996D7Jjds3vS9/arguing-by-definition"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2008-02-21</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Philosophy of Language</primary></indexterm>
  <para>&quot;This plucked chicken has two legs and no feathers—therefore, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> it is a human!&quot;</para>
<para>When people argue definitions, they usually start with some visible, known, or at least widely believed set of characteristics; then pull out a dictionary, and point out that these characteristics fit the dictionary definition; and so conclude, &quot;Therefore, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> atheism is a religion!&quot;</para>
<para>But visible, known, widely believed characteristics are rarely the <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_4FcxgdvdQP45D6Skg">real</olink><olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yuKaWPRTxZoov4z8K">point</olink> of a dispute.  Just the fact that someone thinks Socrates&apos;s two legs are evident enough to make a good premise for the argument, &quot;Therefore, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> Socrates is human!&quot; indicates that bipedalism probably isn&apos;t <emphasis>really</emphasis> what&apos;s at stake—or the listener would reply, &quot;Whaddaya mean Socrates is bipedal?  That&apos;s what we&apos;re arguing about in the first place!&quot;</para>
<para>Now there is an important sense in which we can legitimately move from evident characteristics to not-so-evident ones.  You can, legitimately, see that Socrates is human-shaped, and predict his vulnerability to hemlock.  But this <emphasis>probabilistic</emphasis> inference does not rely on dictionary definitions or common usage; it relies on the universe containing <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_WBw8dDkAWohFjWQSk">empirical clusters</olink> of <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_jMTbQj9XB5ah2maup">similar things</olink>.</para>
<para>This cluster structure is not going to change depending on how you define your words.  Even if you look up the dictionary definition of &quot;human&quot; and it says &quot;all featherless bipeds except Socrates&quot;, that isn&apos;t going to change the <emphasis>actual </emphasis>degree to which Socrates is similar to the rest of us featherless bipeds.</para>
<para>When you are arguing <emphasis>correctly</emphasis> from cluster structure, you&apos;ll say something like, &quot;Socrates has two arms, two feet, a nose and tongue, speaks fluent Greek, uses tools, and in every aspect I&apos;ve been able to observe him, seems to have every major and minor property that characterizes <emphasis>Homo sapiens;</emphasis> so I&apos;m going to guess that he has human DNA, human biochemistry, and is vulnerable to hemlock just like all other <emphasis>Homo sapiens</emphasis> in whom hemlock has been clinically tested for lethality.&quot;</para>
<para>And suppose I reply, &quot;But I saw Socrates out in the fields with some herbologists; I think they were trying to prepare an antidote.  Therefore I <emphasis>don&apos;t</emphasis> expect Socrates to keel over after he drinks the hemlock—he will be an exception to the general behavior of objects in his cluster: they did not take an antidote, and he did.&quot;</para>
<para>Now there&apos;s not much point in arguing over whether Socrates is &quot;human&quot; or not.  The conversation has to <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_GKfPL6LQFgB49FEnv">move to a more detailed level</olink>, poke around <emphasis>inside</emphasis> the details that make up the &quot;human&quot; category—talk about human biochemistry, and specifically, the neurotoxic effects of coniine.</para>
<para>If you go on insisting, &quot;But Socrates is a human and humans, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> are mortal!&quot; then what you&apos;re really trying to do is blur out everything you know about Socrates <emphasis>except</emphasis> the fact of his humanity—insist that the only correct prediction is the one you would make if you knew nothing about Socrates <emphasis>except</emphasis> that he was human.</para>
<para>Which is like insisting that a coin is 50% likely to be showing heads or tails, because it is a &quot;fair coin&quot;, after you&apos;ve <emphasis>actually looked at the coin</emphasis> and it&apos;s showing heads.  It&apos;s like insisting that Frodo has ten fingers, because most hobbits have ten fingers, after you&apos;ve <emphasis>already looked at his hands</emphasis> and seen nine fingers.  Naturally this is illegal under Bayesian probability theory:  You can&apos;t just refuse to condition on new evidence.</para>
<para>And you can&apos;t just keep one categorization and make estimates based on that, while deliberately throwing out everything else you know.</para>
<para>Not every piece of new evidence makes a significant difference, of course.  If I see that Socrates has nine fingers, this isn&apos;t going to noticeably change my estimate of his vulnerability to hemlock, because I&apos;ll expect that the way Socrates lost his finger didn&apos;t change the rest of his biochemistry.  And this is true, <emphasis>whether or not</emphasis> the dictionary&apos;s definition says that human beings have ten fingers.  The legal inference is based on the cluster structure of the environment, and the causal structure of biology; <emphasis>not </emphasis>what the dictionary editor writes down, nor even &quot;common usage&quot;.</para>
<para>Now ordinarily, when you&apos;re doing this <emphasis>right</emphasis>—in a <emphasis>legitimate</emphasis> way—you just say, &quot;The coniine alkaloid found in hemlock produces muscular paralysis in humans, resulting in death by asphyxiation.&quot;  Or more simply, &quot;Humans are vulnerable to hemlock.&quot;  That&apos;s how it&apos;s usually said in a <emphasis>legitimate</emphasis> argument.</para>
<para>When would someone feel the need to <emphasis>strengthen</emphasis> the argument with the emphatic phrase &quot;by definition&quot;?  (I.e. &quot;Humans are vulnerable to hemlock <emphasis>by definition!</emphasis>&quot;)  Why, when the inferred characteristic has been called into doubt—Socrates has been seen consulting herbologists—and so the speaker feels the need to tighten the vise of logic.</para>
<para>So when you see &quot;by definition&quot; used like this, it usually means:  &quot;Forget what you&apos;ve heard about Socrates consulting herbologists—humans, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> are mortal!&quot;</para>
<para>People feel the need to squeeze the argument onto a single course by saying &quot;Any P, by definition, has property Q!&quot;, on exactly those occasions when they see, and prefer to dismiss out of hand, <emphasis>additional arguments</emphasis> that call into doubt the default inference based on clustering.</para>
<para>So too with the argument &quot;X, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> is a Y!&quot;  E.g., &quot;Atheists believe that God doesn&apos;t exist; therefore atheists have beliefs about God, because a negative belief is still a belief; therefore atheism asserts answers to theological questions; therefore atheism is, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> a religion.&quot;</para>
<para>You wouldn&apos;t feel the need to say, &quot;Hinduism, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> is a religion!&quot; because, well, of course Hinduism is a religion.  It&apos;s not just a religion &quot;by definition&quot;, it&apos;s, like, an <emphasis>actual</emphasis> religion.</para>
<para>Atheism does not resemble the central members of the &quot;religion&quot; cluster, so if it wasn&apos;t for the fact that atheism is a religion <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> you might go around thinking that atheism <emphasis>wasn&apos;t</emphasis> a religion.  That&apos;s why you&apos;ve got to crush all opposition by pointing out that &quot;Atheism is a religion&quot; is true <emphasis>by definition</emphasis>, because it isn&apos;t true any other way.</para>
<para>Which is to say:  People insist that &quot;X, <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> is a Y!&quot; on those occasions when they&apos;re trying to <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yuKaWPRTxZoov4z8K">sneak in a connotation</olink> of Y that isn&apos;t directly in the definition, and X doesn&apos;t look all that much like other members of the Y cluster.</para>
<para>Over the last thirteen years I&apos;ve been keeping track of how often this phrase is used correctly versus incorrectly—though not with literal statistics, I fear.  But eyeballing suggests that using the phrase <emphasis>by definition,</emphasis> anywhere outside of math, is among the most alarming signals of flawed argument I&apos;ve ever found.  It&apos;s right up there with &quot;<link xl:href="http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/G/Godwins-Law.html">Hitler</link>&quot;, &quot;God&quot;, &quot;absolutely certain&quot; and &quot;can&apos;t prove that&quot;.</para>
<para>This heuristic of failure is not perfect—the first time I ever spotted a correct usage outside of math, it was by Richard Feynman; and since then I&apos;ve spotted more.  But you&apos;re probably better off just deleting the phrase &quot;by definition&quot; from your vocabulary—and <emphasis>always</emphasis> on any occasion where you might be tempted to say it in italics or followed with an exclamation mark.  That&apos;s a bad idea <emphasis>by definition!</emphasis></para>

  
</section>
