<section xml:id="item_97Y7Jwrzxyfzz3Ad2"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Failing to Learn from History</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/97Y7Jwrzxyfzz3Ad2/failing-to-learn-from-history"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2007-08-30</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Rationality</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>History</primary></indexterm>
  <para>Once upon a time, in my reckless youth, when I knew not the Way of Bayes, I gave a Mysterious Answer to a mysterious-seeming question. Many failures occurred in sequence, but one mistake stands out as most critical: My younger self did not realize that <emphasis>solving a mystery should make it feel less confusing.</emphasis> I was trying to explain a Mysterious Phenomenon—which to me meant providing a cause for it, fitting it into an integrated model of reality. Why should this make the phenomenon less Mysterious, when that is its nature? I was trying to <emphasis>explain</emphasis> the Mysterious Phenomenon, not render it (by some impossible alchemy) into a mundane phenomenon, a phenomenon that wouldn’t even call out for an unusual explanation in the first place. </para>
<para>As a Traditional Rationalist, I knew the historical tales of astrologers and astronomy, of alchemists and chemistry, of vitalists and biology. But the Mysterious Phenomenon was not like this. It was something <emphasis>new</emphasis>, something stranger, something more difficult, something that ordinary science had failed to explain for centuries— </para>
<para>—as if stars and matter and life had not been mysteries for hundreds of years and thousands of years, from the dawn of human thought right up until science finally solved them—</para>
<para>We learn about astronomy and chemistry and biology in school, and it seems to us that these matters have <emphasis>always been</emphasis> the proper realm of science, that they have <emphasis>never been</emphasis> mysterious. When science dares to challenge a new Great Puzzle, the children of that generation are skeptical, for they have never seen science explain something that <emphasis>feels</emphasis> mysterious to them. Science is only good for explaining <emphasis>scientific</emphasis> subjects, like stars and matter and life. </para>
<para>I thought the lesson of history was that astrologers and alchemists and vitalists had an innate character flaw, a tendency toward mysterianism, which led them to come up with mysterious explanations for non-mysterious subjects. But surely, if a phenomenon really <emphasis>was</emphasis> very weird, a weird explanation might be in order? </para>
<para>It was only afterward, when I began to see the mundane structure inside the mystery, that I realized whose shoes I was standing in. Only then did I realize how reasonable vitalism had seemed <emphasis>at the time</emphasis>, how <emphasis>surprising</emphasis> and <emphasis>embarrassing</emphasis> had been the universe’s reply of, “Life is mundane, and does not need a weird explanation.” </para>
<para>We read history but we don’t <emphasis>live</emphasis> it, we don’t <emphasis>experience</emphasis> it. If only I had <emphasis>personally</emphasis> postulated astrological mysteries and then discovered Newtonian mechanics, postulated alchemical mysteries and then discovered chemistry, postulated vitalistic mysteries and then discovered biology. I would have thought of my Mysterious Answer and said to myself: <emphasis>No way am I falling for that again.</emphasis></para>

  
</section>
