<section xml:id="item_x4dG4GhpZH2hgz59x"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Joy in the Merely Real</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/x4dG4GhpZH2hgz59x/joy-in-the-merely-real"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2008-03-20</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Emotions</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Reductionism</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Fun Theory</primary></indexterm>
  <blockquote>
  <para>                     ...Do not all charms fly</para>
  <para> At the mere touch of cold philosophy?</para>
  <para> There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:</para>
  <para> We know her woof, her texture; she is given</para>
  <para> In the dull catalogue of common things.</para>
  <para>        —John Keats, <emphasis>Lamia</emphasis></para>
  <para>&quot;Nothing is &apos;mere&apos;.&quot;</para>
  <para>        —Richard Feynman<emphasis> </emphasis></para>
</blockquote>
<para>You&apos;ve got to admire that phrase, &quot;dull catalogue of common things&quot;.  What is it, exactly, that goes in this catalogue?  Besides rainbows, that is?</para>
<para>Why, things that are mundane, of course.  Things that are normal; things that are unmagical; things that are known, or knowable; things that play by the rules (or that play by <emphasis>any</emphasis> rules, which makes them boring); things that are part of the ordinary universe; things that are, in a word, <emphasis>real.</emphasis></para>
<para>Now that&apos;s what I call setting yourself up for a fall.</para>
<para>At that rate, sooner or later you&apos;re going to be disappointed in <emphasis>everything</emphasis>—either it will turn out not to exist, or even worse, it will turn out to be real.</para>
<para>If we cannot take joy in things that are merely real, our lives will <emphasis>always</emphasis> be empty.</para>
<para>For what sin are rainbows demoted to the dull catalogue of common things?  For the sin of having a scientific explanation.  &quot;We know her woof, her texture&quot;, says Keats—an interesting use of the word &quot;we&quot;, because I <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_mTf8MkpAigm3HP6x2">suspect that Keats didn&apos;t know</olink> the explanation himself.  I suspect that just being <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_L22jhyY9ocXQNLqyE">told that someone else knew</olink> was too much for him to take.  I suspect that just the notion of rainbows being scientifically explicable <emphasis>in principle</emphasis> would have been too much to take.  And if Keats didn&apos;t think like that, well, I know plenty of people who do.</para>
<para>I have already remarked that nothing is <emphasis>inherently</emphasis><olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_6i3zToomS86oj9bS6">mysterious</olink>—nothing that actually exists, that is.  If I am <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_f6ZLxEWaankRZ2Crv">ignorant</olink> about a phenomenon, that is <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_ZTRiSNmeGQK8AkdN2">a fact about my state of mind</olink>, not a fact about the phenomenon; to <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_yxvi9RitzZDpqn6Yh">worship</olink> a phenomenon because it seems so wonderfully mysterious, is to worship your own ignorance; a blank map does not correspond to a blank territory, it is just somewhere we haven&apos;t visited yet, etc. etc...</para>
<para>Which is to say that <emphasis>everything</emphasis>—everything that <emphasis>actually </emphasis>exists—is liable to end up in &quot;the dull catalogue of common things&quot;, sooner or later.</para>
<para>Your choice is either:</para>
<itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para> Decide that things are allowed to be unmagical, knowable, scientifically explicable, in a word, <emphasis>real,</emphasis> and yet still worth caring about;</para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para> Or go about the rest of your life suffering from existential ennui that is <emphasis>unresolvable.</emphasis></para>
  </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>(Self-deception might be an option for others, but <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_Hs3ymqypvhgFMkgLb">not for you</olink>.)</para>
<para>This puts quite a different complexion on the bizarre habit indulged by those strange folk called <emphasis>scientists,</emphasis> wherein they suddenly become fascinated by pocket lint or bird droppings or rainbows, or some other ordinary thing which world-weary and sophisticated folk would never give a second glance.</para>
<para>You might say that scientists—at least <emphasis>some </emphasis>scientists—are those folk who are <emphasis>in principle</emphasis> capable of enjoying life in the real universe.</para>

  
</section>
