<section xml:id="item_WjpA4PCjt5EkTGbLF"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Bind Yourself to Reality</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WjpA4PCjt5EkTGbLF/bind-yourself-to-reality"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2008-03-22</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Rationality</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Contact with Reality</primary></indexterm>
  <para>So perhaps you&apos;re reading all this, and asking:  &quot;Yes, but what does this have to do with <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_tPqQdLCuxanjhoaNs">reductionism</olink>?&quot;</para>
<para>Partially, it&apos;s a matter of <olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_3XgYbghWruBMrPTAL">leaving a line of retreat</olink>.  It&apos;s not easy to take something <emphasis>important</emphasis> apart into components, when you&apos;re convinced that this removes magic from the world, unweaves the rainbow.  I do plan to take certain things apart, on this blog; and I prefer not to create pointless existential anguish.</para>
<para>Partially, it&apos;s the crusade against Hollywood Rationality, the concept that understanding the rainbow subtracts its beauty.  The rainbow is still beautiful <emphasis>plus</emphasis> you get the beauty of physics.</para>
<para>But even more deeply, it&apos;s one of these subtle <link xl:href="http://yudkowsky.net/virtues/">hidden-core-of-rationality</link> things.  You know, the sort of thing where I start talking about &apos;<link xl:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/HLERouG7QBt7jzLt4/zen-and-the-art-of-rationality">the Way</link>&apos;.  It&apos;s about <emphasis>binding yourself to reality.</emphasis></para>
<para>In one of Frank Herbert&apos;s <emphasis>Dune</emphasis> books, IIRC, it is said that a Truthsayer gains their ability to detect lies in others by always speaking truth themselves, so that they form a relationship with the truth whose violation they can feel.  It wouldn&apos;t work, but I still think it&apos;s one of the more beautiful thoughts in fiction.  At the very least, to get close to the truth, you have to be willing to press yourself up against reality as tightly as possible, without flinching away, or sneering down.</para>
<para>You can see the bind-yourself-to-reality theme in &quot;<olink targetdoc="item_coGq3LC5Yn4vZiu6k" targetptr="item_vYsuM8cpuRgZS5rYB">Lotteries:  A Waste of Hope</olink>.&quot;  Understanding that lottery tickets have negative expected utility, does not mean that you give up the hope of being rich.  It means that you stop wasting that hope on lottery tickets.  You put the hope into your job, your school, your startup, your eBay sideline; and if you truly have nothing worth hoping for, then maybe it&apos;s time to start looking.</para>
<para>It&apos;s not dreams I object to, only <emphasis>impossible</emphasis> dreams.  The lottery isn&apos;t impossible, but it is an un-actionable near-impossibility.  It&apos;s not that winning the lottery is extremely <emphasis>difficult</emphasis>—requires a desperate effort—but that <emphasis>work </emphasis>isn&apos;t the issue.</para>
<para>I say all this, to exemplify the idea of taking emotional energy that is flowing off to nowhere, and binding it into the realms of reality.</para>
<para>This doesn&apos;t mean setting goals that are low enough to be &quot;realistic&quot;, i.e., easy and safe and parentally approved.  Maybe this is good advice in your personal case, I don&apos;t know, but I&apos;m not the one to say it.</para>
<para>What I mean is that you can invest emotional energy in rainbows even if they turn out <emphasis>not</emphasis> to be magic.  <link xl:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Ga2HSwf9iQe64JwAa/why-is-the-future-so-absurd">The future is always absurd</link> but it is never <emphasis>unreal.</emphasis></para>
<para>The Hollywood Rationality stereotype is that &quot;rational = emotionless&quot;; the more reasonable you are, the more of your emotions Reason inevitably destroys.  In &quot;<olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_SqF8cHjJv43mvJJzx">Feeling Rational</olink>&quot; I contrast this against <emphasis>&quot;That which can be destroyed by the truth should be&quot;</emphasis> and <emphasis>&quot;That which the truth nourishes should thrive&quot;.</emphasis>  When you have arrived at your best picture of the truth, there is nothing irrational about the emotions you feel as a result of that—the emotions cannot be destroyed by truth, so they must not be irrational.</para>
<para>So instead of <emphasis>destroying</emphasis> emotional energies associated with bad explanations for rainbows, as the Hollywood Rationality stereotype would have it, let us <emphasis>redirect</emphasis> these emotional energies into reality—bind them to beliefs that are as true as we can make them.</para>
<para>Want to fly?  Don&apos;t give up on flight.  Give up on flying potions and build yourself an airplane.</para>
<para>Remember the theme of &quot;<olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_tWLFWAndSZSYN6rPB">Think Like Reality</olink>&quot;, where I talked about how when physics seems counterintuitive, you&apos;ve got to accept that it&apos;s not <emphasis>physics</emphasis> that&apos;s weird, it&apos;s <emphasis>you</emphasis>?</para>
<para>What I&apos;m talking about now is like that, only with <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_SqF8cHjJv43mvJJzx">emotions</olink> instead of hypotheses—binding your feelings into the real world.  Not the &quot;realistic&quot; everyday world.  I would be a howling hypocrite if I told you to shut up and do your homework.  I mean the <emphasis>real</emphasis> real world, the <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_7iTwGquBFZKttpEdE">lawful universe</olink>, that includes <link xl:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Ga2HSwf9iQe64JwAa/why-is-the-future-so-absurd">absurdities</link> like Moon landings and the evolution of human intelligence.  Just not any magic, anywhere, ever<emphasis>.</emphasis></para>
<para>It is a Hollywood Rationality meme that &quot;Science takes the fun out of life.&quot;</para>
<para>Science puts the fun back <emphasis>into</emphasis> life.</para>
<para>Rationality directs your emotional energies into the universe, rather than somewhere else.</para>

  
</section>
