<section xml:id="item_SA79JMXKWke32A3hG"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Original Seeing</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/SA79JMXKWke32A3hG/original-seeing"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2007-10-14</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Writing (communication method)</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Original Seeing</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Practical</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Cached Thoughts</primary></indexterm>
  <para>Since Robert Pirsig put this very well, I’ll just copy down what he said. I don’t know if this story is based on reality or not, but either way, it’s true.</para>
<blockquote>
  <para> He’d been having trouble with students who had nothing to say. At first he thought it was laziness but later it became apparent that it wasn’t. They just couldn’t think of anything to say.</para>
  <para>One of them, a girl with strong-lensed glasses, wanted to write a five-hundred word essay about the United States. He was used to the sinking feeling that comes from statements like this, and suggested without disparagement that she narrow it down to just Bozeman.</para>
  <para>When the paper came due she didn’t have it and was quite upset. She had tried and tried but she just couldn’t think of anything to say.</para>
  <para>It just stumped him. Now <emphasis>he</emphasis> couldn’t think of anything to say. A silence occurred, and then a peculiar answer: “Narrow it down to the <emphasis>main street</emphasis> of Bozeman.” It was a stroke of insight.</para>
  <para>She nodded dutifully and went out. But just before her next class she came back in <emphasis>real</emphasis> distress, tears this time, distress that had obviously been there for a long time. She still couldn’t think of anything to say, and couldn’t understand why, if she couldn’t think of anything about <emphasis>all</emphasis> of Bozeman, she should be able to think of something about just one street.</para>
  <para>He was furious. “You’re not <emphasis>looking!</emphasis>” he said. A memory came back of his own dismissal from the University for having <emphasis>too much</emphasis> to say. For every fact there is an <emphasis>infinity</emphasis> of hypotheses. The more you <emphasis>look</emphasis> the more you <emphasis>see</emphasis>. She really wasn’t looking and yet somehow didn’t understand this.</para>
  <para>He told her angrily, “Narrow it down to the <emphasis>front</emphasis> of <emphasis>one</emphasis> building on the main street of Bozeman. The Opera House. Start with the upper left-hand brick.”</para>
  <para>Her eyes, behind the thick-lensed glasses, opened wide.</para>
  <para>She came in the next class with a puzzled look and handed him a five-thousand-word essay on the front of the Opera House on the main street of Bozeman, Montana. “I sat in the hamburger stand across the street,” she said, “and started writing about the first brick, and the second brick, and then by the third brick it all started to come and I couldn’t stop. They thought I was crazy, and they kept kidding me, but here it all is. I don’t understand it.”</para>
  <para>Neither did he, but on long walks through the streets of town he thought about it and concluded she was evidently stopped with the same kind of blockage that had paralyzed him on his first day of teaching. She was blocked because she was trying to repeat, in her writing, things she had already heard, just as on the first day he had tried to repeat things he had already decided to say. She couldn’t think of anything to write about Bozeman because she couldn’t recall anything she had heard worth repeating. She was strangely unaware that she could look and see freshly for herself, as she wrote, without primary regard for what had been said before. The narrowing down to one brick destroyed the blockage because it was so obvious she <emphasis>had</emphasis> to do some original and direct seeing.</para>
  <para>—Robert M. Pirsig,</para>
  <para><emphasis>Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance</emphasis></para>
</blockquote>

  
</section>
