<section xml:id="item_f4RJtHBPvDRJcCTva"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>When Anthropomorphism Became Stupid</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/f4RJtHBPvDRJcCTva/when-anthropomorphism-became-stupid"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2008-08-17</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Intellectual Progress (Society-Level)</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>General Intelligence</primary></indexterm>
  <para>It turns out that most things in the universe don&apos;t have minds.</para>
<para>This statement would have provoked incredulity among many earlier cultures.  &quot;<link xl:href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Animism">Animism</link>&quot; is the usual term.  They thought that trees, rocks, streams, and hills all had spirits because, hey, why not?</para>
<para>I mean, those lumps of flesh known as &quot;humans&quot; contain thoughts, so why shouldn&apos;t the lumps of wood known as &quot;trees&quot;?</para>
<para>My muscles move at my will, and water flows through a river.  Who&apos;s to say that the river doesn&apos;t have a will to move the water?  The river overflows its banks, and floods my tribe&apos;s gathering-place - why not think that the river was angry, since it moved its parts to hurt us? It&apos;s what we would think when someone&apos;s fist hit our nose.</para>
<para>There is no obvious reason - no reason obvious <emphasis>to a hunter-gatherer</emphasis> - why this cannot be so.  It only seems like a <emphasis>stupid</emphasis> mistake if you <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/12/cultish-counter.html">confuse weirdness with stupidity</link>.  Naturally the belief that rivers have animating spirits seems &quot;weird&quot; to us, since it is not a belief of our tribe.  But there is nothing obviously stupid about thinking that great lumps of moving water have spirits, just like our own lumps of moving flesh.</para>
<para>If the idea were <emphasis>obviously</emphasis> stupid, no one would have believed it.  Just like, for the longest time, nobody believed in the obviously stupid idea that the Earth moves while seeming motionless.</para>
<para>Is it obvious that trees can&apos;t think?  Trees, let us not forget, <emphasis>are in fact</emphasis> our distant cousins.  Go far enough back, and you have a common ancestor with your fern.  If lumps of flesh can think, why not lumps of wood?</para>
<para>For it to be <emphasis>obvious</emphasis> that wood doesn&apos;t think, you have to belong to a culture with microscopes.  Not just <emphasis>any</emphasis> microscopes, but really <emphasis>good</emphasis> microscopes.</para>
<para>Aristotle thought the brain was an organ for cooling the blood. (It&apos;s a good thing that what we believe about our brains has very little effect on their actual operation.)</para>
<para>Egyptians threw the brain away during the process of mummification.</para>
<para>Alcmaeon of Croton, a Pythagorean of the 5th century BCE, put his finger on the brain as the seat of intelligence, because he&apos;d traced the optic nerve from the eye to the brain.  Still, with the amount of evidence he had, it was only a guess.</para>
<para>When did the central role of the brain stop being a guess?  I do not know enough <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/brain-breakthro.html">history</link> to answer this question, and probably there wasn&apos;t any sharp dividing line.  Maybe we could put it at the point where someone traced the anatomy of the nerves, and discovered that severing a nervous connection <emphasis>to the brain</emphasis> blocked movement and sensation?</para>
<para>Even so, that is only a <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/mysterious-answ.html">mysterious</link> spirit moving through the nerves.  Who&apos;s to say that wood and water, even if they lack the little threads found in human anatomy, might not carry the same mysterious spirit by different means?</para>
<para>I&apos;ve spent some time online trying to track down the exact moment when someone noticed the vastly tangled internal structure of the brain&apos;s neurons, and said, &quot;Hey, I bet all this giant tangle is doing complex information-processing!&quot;  I haven&apos;t had much luck.  (It&apos;s not Camillo Golgi - the tangledness of the circuitry was known before Golgi.)  Maybe there was never a watershed moment there, either.</para>
<para>But that discovery of that tangledness, and Charles Darwin&apos;s theory of natural selection, and the notion of cognition as computation, is where I would put the gradual beginning of anthropomorphism&apos;s descent into being <emphasis>obviously</emphasis> wrong.</para>
<para>It&apos;s the point where you can look at a tree, and say:  &quot;I don&apos;t see anything in the tree&apos;s biology that&apos;s doing complex information-processing.  Nor do I see it in the behavior, and if it&apos;s hidden in a way that doesn&apos;t affect the tree&apos;s behavior, how would a selection pressure for such complex information-processing arise?&quot;</para>
<para>It&apos;s the point where you can look at a river, and say, &quot;Water doesn&apos;t contain patterns <link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/11/no-evolution-fo.html">replicating with distant heredity and substantial variation subject to iterative selection</link>, so how would a river come to have any pattern so complex and functionally optimized as a brain?&quot;</para>
<para>It&apos;s the point where you can look at an atom, and say:  &quot;<link xl:href="http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/03/angry-atoms.html">Anger may look simple, but it&apos;s not</link>, and there&apos;s no room for it to fit in something as simple as an atom - not unless there are whole universes of subparticles inside quarks; and even then, since we&apos;ve never seen any sign of atomic anger, it wouldn&apos;t have any effect on the high-level phenomena we know.&quot;</para>
<para>It&apos;s the point where you can look at a puppy, and say:  &quot;The puppy&apos;s parents may push it to the ground when it does something wrong, but that doesn&apos;t mean the puppy is doing moral reasoning.  Our current theories of evolutionary psychology holds that moral reasoning arose as a response to more complex social challenges than that - in their full-fledged human form, our moral adaptations are the result of selection pressures over linguistic arguments about tribal politics.&quot;</para>
<para>It&apos;s the point where you can look at a rock, and say, &quot;This lacks even the simple search trees embodied in a chess-playing program - where would it get the <emphasis>intentions</emphasis> to <emphasis>want</emphasis> to roll downhill, as Aristotle once thought?&quot;</para>
<para>It is written:</para>
<para><emphasis>Zhuangzi and Huizi were strolling along the dam of the Hao Waterfall when Zhuangzi said, &quot;See how the minnows come out and dart around where they please! That&apos;s what fish really enjoy!&quot;</emphasis></para>
<para><emphasis>Huizi said, &quot;You&apos;re not a fish — how do you know what fish enjoy?&quot;</emphasis></para>
<para><emphasis>Zhuangzi said, &quot;You&apos;re not I, so how do you know I don&apos;t know what fish enjoy?&quot;</emphasis></para>
<para>Now we know.</para>

  
</section>
