<section xml:id="item_XzrqkhfwtiSDgKoAF"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Wrong Questions</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XzrqkhfwtiSDgKoAF/wrong-questions"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2023-07-18</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Philosophy of Language</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Cognitive Reduction</primary></indexterm>
  <para>Where the mind cuts against reality&apos;s grain, it generates <emphasis>wrong questions</emphasis>—questions that cannot possibly be answered <emphasis>on their own terms,</emphasis> but only <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_Mc6QcrsbH5NRXbCRX">dissolved</olink> by understanding the cognitive algorithm that generates the <emphasis>perception</emphasis> of a question.</para>
<para>One good cue that you&apos;re dealing with a &quot;wrong question&quot; is when you cannot even <emphasis>imagine</emphasis> any concrete, specific state of how-the-world-is that would answer the question.  When it doesn&apos;t even seem <emphasis>possible</emphasis> to answer the question.</para>
<para>Take the <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_7X2j8HAkWdmMoS8PE">Standard Definitional Dispute</olink>, for example, about the tree falling in a deserted forest.  Is there any way-the-world-could-be—any state of affairs—that corresponds to the word &quot;sound&quot;<emphasis>really meaning</emphasis> only acoustic vibrations, or <emphasis>really</emphasis><emphasis>meaning</emphasis> only auditory experiences?</para>
<para>(&quot;Why, yes,&quot; says the one, &quot;it is the state of affairs where &apos;sound&apos; means acoustic vibrations.&quot;  So <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_GKfPL6LQFgB49FEnv">Taboo</olink> the word &apos;means&apos;, and &apos;represents&apos;, and all similar synonyms, and describe again:  How can the world be, what state of affairs, would make one side right, and the other side wrong?)</para>
<para>Or if that seems too easy, take free will:  What concrete state of affairs, whether in deterministic physics, or in physics with a dice-rolling random component, could ever correspond to having free will?</para>
<para>And if <emphasis>that</emphasis> seems too easy, then ask &quot;Why does anything exist at all?&quot;, and then tell me what a satisfactory answer to that question would even <emphasis>look like.</emphasis></para>
<para>And no, I don&apos;t know the answer to that last one.  But I <emphasis>can</emphasis> guess one thing, based on my previous experience with unanswerable questions.  The answer will not consist of some grand triumphant First Cause.  The question will go away as a result of some insight into how my mental algorithms run skew to reality, after which I will understand how the question itself was wrong from the beginning—how the question itself assumed the fallacy, contained the skew.</para>
<para>Mystery exists in the mind, not in reality.  If I am ignorant about a phenomenon, that is a fact about my state of mind, not a fact about the phenomenon itself.  All the more so, if it seems like no possible answer can exist:  Confusion exists in the map, not in the territory.  <emphasis>Unanswerable</emphasis> questions do not mark places where magic enters the universe.  They mark places where your mind runs skew to reality.</para>
<para>Such questions <emphasis>must</emphasis> be dissolved.  Bad things happen when you try to answer them.  It inevitably generates the worst sort of <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_6i3zToomS86oj9bS6">Mysterious Answer to a Mysterious Question</olink>:  The one where you come up with seemingly strong arguments for your Mysterious Answer, but the &quot;answer&quot; doesn&apos;t let you make any new predictions even in retrospect, and the phenomenon still possesses the same sacred inexplicability that it had at the start.</para>
<para>I could guess, for example, that the answer to the puzzle of the First Cause is that nothing <emphasis>does</emphasis> exist—that the whole concept of &quot;existence&quot; is bogus.  But if you sincerely believed that, would you be any less confused?  Me neither.</para>
<para>But the wonderful thing about <emphasis>unanswerable</emphasis> questions is that they are <emphasis>always</emphasis> solvable, at least in my experience.  What went through Queen Elizabeth I&apos;s mind, first thing in the morning, as she woke up on her fortieth birthday?  As I can easily <emphasis>imagine </emphasis>answers to this question, I can readily see that I may never be able to <emphasis>actually</emphasis> answer it, the true information having been lost in time.</para>
<para>On the other hand, &quot;Why does anything exist at all?&quot; seems <emphasis>so</emphasis> absolutely impossible that I can infer that I am just confused, one way or another, and the truth probably isn&apos;t all that complicated in an absolute sense, and once the confusion goes away I&apos;ll be able to see it.</para>
<para>This may seem counterintuitive if you&apos;ve never solved an unanswerable question, but I assure you that it <emphasis>is</emphasis> how these things work.</para>
<para>Coming tomorrow:  A simple trick for handling &quot;wrong questions&quot;.</para>

  
</section>
