<section xml:id="item_QrhAeKBkm2WsdRYao"
      xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
      version="5.0"
      xml:lang="en"
      xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
      xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
      xmlns:xl="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
  <info>
    <title>Searching for Bayes-Structure</title>
    <bibliosource class="uri">
      <link xlink:href="https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/QrhAeKBkm2WsdRYao/searching-for-bayes-structure"></link>
    </bibliosource>
    <pubdate doc_status="draft">2008-02-29</pubdate>
  </info>
  <indexterm><primary>Bayesianism</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Information Theory</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Law-Thinking</primary></indexterm>
<indexterm><primary>Bayes' Theorem</primary></indexterm>
  <blockquote>
  <para> &quot;<emphasis>Gnomish helms</emphasis> should not function.  Their very construction seems to defy the nature of thaumaturgical law.  In fact, they are impossible.  Like most products of gnomish minds, they include a large number of bells and whistles, and very little substance.  Those that work usually have a <emphasis>minor helm</emphasis> contained within, always hidden away, disguised to appear innocuous and inessential.&quot;</para>
  <para>              -- Spelljammer campaign set</para>
</blockquote>
<para>We have seen that knowledge implies <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yLcuygFfMfrfK8KjF">mutual information</olink> between a mind and its environment, and we have seen that this <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_QkX2bAkwG2EpGvNug">mutual information is negentropy</olink> in a very physical sense:  If you know where molecules are and how fast they&apos;re moving, you can turn heat into work via a Maxwell&apos;s Demon / Szilard engine.</para>
<para>We have seen that <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_zFuCxbY9E2E8HTbfZ">forming true beliefs without evidence</olink> is the same sort of improbability as a hot glass of water spontaneously reorganizing into ice cubes and electricity.  Rationality takes &quot;work&quot; in a thermodynamic sense, not just the sense of mental effort; minds have to radiate heat if they are not perfectly efficient.  This cognitive work is governed by probability theory, of which thermodynamics is a special case.  (Statistical mechanics is a special case of statistics.)</para>
<para>If you saw a machine continually spinning a wheel, apparently without being plugged into a wall outlet or any other source of power, then you would look for a hidden battery, or a nearby broadcast power source - something to explain the work being done, without violating the laws of physics.</para>
<para>So if a mind is arriving at true beliefs, and we assume that the <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_QkX2bAkwG2EpGvNug">second law of thermodynamics</olink> has not been violated, that mind must be doing something at least <emphasis>vaguely</emphasis> Bayesian - at least one process with a sort-of Bayesian structure <emphasis>somewhere</emphasis> - or it <emphasis>couldn&apos;t possibly work</emphasis>.</para>
<para>In the beginning, at time T=0, a mind has no mutual information with a subsystem S in its environment.  At time T=1,the mind has 10 bits of mutual information with S.  Somewhere in between, the mind must have encountered evidence - under the Bayesian definition of evidence, because all Bayesian evidence is mutual information and all mutual information is Bayesian evidence, they are just different ways of looking at it - and processed at least some of that evidence, however inefficiently, in the right direction according to Bayes on at least some occasions.  The mind must have <emphasis>moved in harmony with the Bayes</emphasis> at least a little, somewhere along the line - either that or violated the second law of thermodynamics by creating mutual information from nothingness.</para>
<para>In fact, any <emphasis>part</emphasis> of a cognitive process that <emphasis>contributes usefully</emphasis> to truth-finding must have at least a little Bayesian structure - must harmonize with Bayes, at some point or another - must partially conform with the Bayesian flow, however noisily - despite however many disguising bells and whistles - even if this Bayesian structure is only apparent in the context of surrounding processes.  Or it couldn&apos;t even <emphasis>help.</emphasis></para>
<para>How philosophers pondered the nature of words!  All the ink spent on the <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_dMCFk2n2ur8n62hqB">true definitions of words</olink>, and the <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yA4gF5KrboK2m2Xu7">true meaning of definitions</olink>, and the <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yFDKvfN6D87Tf5J9f">true meaning of meaning</olink>!  What collections of gears and wheels they built, in their explanations!  And all along, it was a <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_4FcxgdvdQP45D6Skg">disguised</olink> form of <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yLcuygFfMfrfK8KjF">Bayesian</olink><olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_3nxs2WYDGzJbzcLMp">inference</olink>!</para>
<para>I was actually a bit disappointed that no one in the audience jumped up and said:  &quot;<emphasis>Yes!  Yes, that&apos;s it!  Of course!  It was really Bayes all along!</emphasis>&quot;</para>
<para>But perhaps it is not <emphasis>quite</emphasis> as exciting to see something that <emphasis>doesn&apos;t</emphasis> look Bayesian on the surface, revealed as Bayes wearing a clever disguise, if: (a) you don&apos;t unravel the mystery yourself, but read about someone else doing it (Newton had more fun than most students taking calculus), and (b) you don&apos;t realize that <emphasis>searching for the hidden Bayes-structure</emphasis> is this huge, difficult, omnipresent quest, like searching for the Holy Grail.</para>
<para>It&apos;s a different quest for each facet of cognition, but the Grail always <emphasis>turns out</emphasis> to be the same.  It has to be the <emphasis>right</emphasis> Grail, though - and the <emphasis>entire</emphasis> Grail, without any parts missing - and so each time you have to go on the quest looking for a full answer <emphasis>whatever</emphasis> form it may take, rather than trying to artificially construct vaguely hand-waving Grailish arguments.  <emphasis>Then</emphasis> you always find the same Holy Grail at the end.</para>
<para>It was previously pointed out to me that I might be losing some of my readers with the long essays, because I hadn&apos;t &quot;made it clear where I was going&quot;...</para>
<para>...but it&apos;s <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_HLqWn5LASfhhArZ7w">not so easy</olink> to just tell people where you&apos;re going, when you&apos;re going somewhere like <emphasis>that.</emphasis></para>
<para>It&apos;s not very helpful to merely <emphasis>know that</emphasis> a form of cognition is Bayesian, if you don&apos;t <emphasis>know how</emphasis> it is Bayesian.  If you can&apos;t see the detailed flow of probability, you have nothing but a <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_NMoLJuDJEms7Ku9XS">password</olink> - or, a bit more charitably, a hint at the form an answer would take; but certainly not an answer.  That&apos;s why there&apos;s a Grand Quest for the Hidden Bayes-Structure, rather than being done when you say &quot;Bayes!&quot; Bayes-structure can be buried under all kinds of disguies, hidden behind thickets of wheels and gears, obscured by bells and whistles.</para>
<para>The way you begin to grasp the Quest for the Holy Bayes is that you learn about cognitive phenomenon XYZ, which seems really useful - and there&apos;s this bunch of philosophers who&apos;ve been arguing about its true nature for centuries, and they are still arguing - and there&apos;s a bunch of AI scientists trying to make a computer do it, but they can&apos;t agree on the philosophy either -</para>
<para>And - <emphasis>Huh, that&apos;s odd!</emphasis> - this cognitive phenomenon didn&apos;t look anything like Bayesian on the surface, but there&apos;s this non-obvious underlying structure that has a Bayesian interpretation - but wait, there&apos;s still some useful work getting done that can&apos;t be explained in Bayesian terms - no wait, <emphasis>that&apos;s</emphasis> Bayesian too - OH MY GOD this <emphasis>completely different</emphasis> cognitive process, that <emphasis>also</emphasis> didn&apos;t look Bayesian on the surface, ALSO HAS BAYESIAN STRUCTURE - hold on, are these non-Bayesian parts even <emphasis>doing</emphasis> anything?</para>
<itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para> Yes:  Wow, those are Bayesian too!</para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para> No:  Dear heavens, what a <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_jAToJHtg39AMTAuJo">stupid design</olink>.  I could eat a bucket of amino acids and puke a better brain architecture than that.</para>
  </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>Once this happens to you a few times, you kinda pick up the rhythm.  That&apos;s what I&apos;m talking about here, the rhythm.</para>
<para>Trying to talk about the rhythm is like trying to dance about architecture.</para>
<para>This left me in a bit of a pickle when it came to trying to explain in advance where I was going.  I know from experience that if I say, &quot;Bayes is the secret of the universe,&quot; some people may say &quot;<link xl:href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2T1LIrzsgqA">Yes!</link>  Bayes is the secret of the universe!&quot;; and others will snort and say, &quot;<olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_bkSkRwo9SRYxJMiSY">How narrow-minded you are</olink>; look at all these other ad-hoc but amazingly useful methods, like <link xl:href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tikhonov_regularization#Bayesian_interpretation">regularized linear regression</link>, that <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_bkSkRwo9SRYxJMiSY">I have in my toolbox</olink>.&quot;</para>
<para>I hoped that with a specific example in hand of &quot;something that doesn&apos;t look all that Bayesian on the surface, but <olink targetdoc="item_wAXodw6LPScjrdnkR" targetptr="item_yLcuygFfMfrfK8KjF">turns out to be Bayesian after all</olink>&quot; - <emphasis>and</emphasis> an explanation of <olink targetdoc="item_PYQ2izdfDPTe5uJTG" targetptr="item_NMoLJuDJEms7Ku9XS">the difference between passwords and knowledge</olink> - <emphasis>and</emphasis> an explanation of <olink targetdoc="item_ah2GqzZSeBpW9QHgb" targetptr="item_bkSkRwo9SRYxJMiSY">the difference between tools and laws</olink> - maybe <emphasis>then</emphasis> I could convey such of the rhythm as can be understood without personally going on the quest.</para>
<para>Of course this is not the <emphasis>full</emphasis> Secret of the Bayesian Conspiracy, but it&apos;s all that I can convey at this point.  Besides, the complete secret is known only to the Bayes Council, and if I told you, I&apos;d have to hire you.</para>
<para>To <emphasis>see through</emphasis> the surface adhockery of a cognitive process, to the Bayesian structure <emphasis>underneath</emphasis> - to perceive the probability flows, and <emphasis>know how,</emphasis> not just <emphasis>know that,</emphasis> this cognition too is Bayesian - as it always is - as it always must be - to be able to sense the Force underlying all cognition - this, is the Bayes-Sight.</para>
<blockquote>
  <para>     &quot;...And the Queen of Kashfa sees with the Eye of the Serpent.&quot;</para>
  <para>     &quot;I don&apos;t know that she sees with it,&quot; I said.  &quot;She&apos;s still recovering from the operation.  But that&apos;s an interesting thought.  If she could see with it, what might she behold?&quot;</para>
  <para>     &quot;The clear, cold lines of eternity, I daresay.  Beneath all Shadow.&quot;</para>
  <para>              -- Roger Zelazny, <emphasis>Prince of Chaos</emphasis></para>
</blockquote>

  
</section>
